Διφρίσκος (chariot) adds to fun score because it is a diminutive of δίφρος. This word is used to make the situation seem inane, so he says “little chariot” instead of just “chariot”. Χρέος refers to the debt that is distressing him so much, so it is negative.
Play on words here with ἐξήλικας meaning first to literally roll, and then to figuratively roll. The word itself is not inherently “fun,” it is the context of it being used in two different ways. He is lamenting the consequences of his debt.
About to make a request, he seems to get more serious, so no joke is made and the fun score is reduced. Negative words about Poseidon (god of horses).
Roundabout way of saying these men are expert deceivers. Does not appear to carry any particular sentiment. Fun because of fluff.
Here, there are several words that are used with the strict intention of being insults, and therefore I have categorized them as negative. Ἀνυπόδητος is included in fun score as well because it makes fun of a well-known fact that Socrates often went barefoot and implies that his students also did the same thing.
Neutral sentiment as the father is focused on getting the son to listen to him regardless of how he feels about the arrangement. Fun score is low because there is no joke here and the line has no fluff.
Here he really tries to make the idea seem as appealing to Phid. as possible. He is admitting here that the thing he wants to do (scam people) is morally wrong, but he is pushing for it as a great course of action anyway, adding to fun score and contributing to positive sentiment.
Negative sentiment from context of threat – he says he will not allow his son to eat his food anymore, and neither will the horse. Demeter (Ceres in the translation) is invoked here to make the message stronger as she would be the goddess in charge of that in the first place. Overall a serious line, so not a lot of “fun.”
It would be a better fit for a young man to go to this school, so it is funny that the old man chooses to go, as he is that desperate for a fix to his debts.
Clearly a strange question to ask, and the audience would question its relevance. Student is merely recounting this, so no sentiment.
Besides δεξιός (on the right hand), the line uses no charged language and is mostly factual, so neutral sentiment.
Chaerephon being Sphettian could be included to make a pun about why he cares about insects (σφήξ means “wasp”) because it is strange for the disciple to mention the origin of Chaerephon now, after he has already been brought up in the previous story. No outstanding sentiment because he is recounting again, but the fun score is at a 1 because the question is silly and there is a possible pun.
No charged language and no straying from conversation relevance.
Strepsiades is praising this discovery so it has a positive sentiment. Previously, I have put πρωκτός as having an impact on “fun” in a sentence, but here it does not seem to affect it. It is more the fact that the “anus” of the gnat is shaped like a trumpet that contributes to fun score than the word itself. Τρίσμακαρ (thrice-blest) has positive sentiment.
More physical comedy than lexical comedy. Although the actual incident is not seen, the sentence is fun because it speaks of something laughable happening and relies on the physical sense of it to be funny. A neutral recounting of events, although the student would believe this to be a negative incident.
Sommerstein interprets the beginning of the sentence as implying Socrates simply distracted the students with a compass geometry trick instead of feeding them, but the meaning shifts as the pun becomes more noticeable. He seduced a boy from the Palaestra and robbed him in order to afford a meal. διαβήτην refers to a pair of compasses, but it can also mean “a bestrider.” Because of its crude undertone, διαβήτης is part of fun lexicon. Neutral sentiment is continued.
Thales is another philosopher. He likes what he has heard of Socrates. Added fun score because the audience would know that the reason he admires these stories is different than why the disciple admires them. To Strep, the stories only show how good of a con artist Socrates is, while the disciple would see them as examples of Socrates’ wisdom.
Immediate negative reaction to what he sees behind the doors. Fun comes from immediate change in tone.
He is bewildered by what he is seeing, but this sentence itself does not have a sentiment. The fun comes from Strep seeming to patronize them, perhaps out of concern, about tree roots.
Diminutive of Socrates is repeated because Strep is trying to get his way. Neutral sentiment and low fluff.
A pun – certain diseases can eat up the flesh, and the horse ate up his resources (literally and figuratively). A complaint so negative sentiment.
The language here is similar to what would have been used during a religious rite, although Socrates just denounced the gods and is instead worshiping clouds. Ἀήρ was the topic of some philosophical debates, so Aristophanes using it here is mostly to mock philosophers. Positive sentiment because this is a worship to appeal to the clouds.
Strep is worried this prayer will cause it to rain and he complains of his luck. Given a 2 because the line’s only purpose is for comedy. Κακοδαίμων translated as “unlucky” here.
Given a 1 because it has a lot of fluff, although there is little direct comedy. Still making an appeal to a higher being, so positive sentiment.
Being afraid is a negative emotion, but it would be a positive thing in the context because they are speaking of the effects of these “gods.” Strep says he now feels as if he needs to “break wind,” as he is so afraid.
Socrates is chastising Strep, but in the same breath, praises goddesses, so it is a mixed sentiment.
This seems to be a fearful question, as the spirits of dead heroes were believed to be dangerous if encountered, and he wonders if these things that Socrates is praying to will be similar. No fluff here.
Socrates calls himself an “idle man” as if it were a compliment, acknowledging that he does not contribute much. He then describes the good things the Clouds provide, which are all skills related to oration, which are obviously things he would see as valuable. None of these skills seem inherently positive on a lexical level, although he speaks of them as if they were. The adjective Οὐράνιος (heavenly) was almost included in sentiment lexicon because it is used to describe the Clouds, but it could easily be used to describe literally where the clouds are located, and is not necessarily a compliment to them.
Now that he knows they are not a danger, he is ready to be enlightened.
Socrates is using words with negative sentiments as if they were positive, like he did in 28. Much detail, so higher fun score.
