Pokes fun at the Medians (occupied modern Iran), which would have been seen negatively (hence "hostile” in translation). Use of “Medos” demonstrates the aggression with which the sleep came for Xanthias. I’ve noticed Eastern people are viewed negatively in this time, 400s BC. However, this is intended to have a positive reaction from the character Sosias, so mixed sentiment. 
A political joke. Draws upon negative associations with Cleonymus (dropping shield in battle and fleeing) to make the joke. Referencing the shield seems strange at first, until Cleonymus is used as the punchline. (Perhaps meant to reference/honor Zeus or at least compare the two with the eagle picking up the shield?) The eagle is used to belittle Cleonymus’ image as it is shown having more “honor” than him. 
Pnyx was a hill used by people for meetings and speeches, etc. Meant to draw similarities between what the animals were doing and human activities, so basically calling the humans sheep and whales. (it is portrayed as uncivilized/not respected because he is describing animals doing it, when people do the same) The image of animals on this platform is intended to be ridiculous. “Rapacious” (greedy) is how πανδοκεύτρια is translated. Πανδοκεύτρια means “hostess” but it is translated figuratively as “accepting all.”
**Come back to. Perhaps add the punchline to the sentence. Is translated with a lisp, although not technically present in original text.
Theorus is clearly disliked. A theoros is an ambassador for states to consult oracles and be present at altars at festivals, etc. Unsure if this definition has any relation to the name  Θέωρος, as I don’t know why these people would be disliked. Mixed sentiment because being with the crows is negative, but given that the characters dislike Theorus, it is presented as a positive. A sort of punishment for whatever wrong he apparently did.
While μυσπολεῖ is a verb, it is used negatively. There are more neutral substitutes for this that could have been used, but weren’t. Few adjectives and nouns are used in this segment, but the verbs are used to create chaos and anxiety, making the sentiment negative.
A pun. Capnius means smoky (κάπνιον = smoke) and is the nickname of another playwright, Ecphantides, who was disliked by writers at the time (via Perseus Digital Library). Perhaps implying that Ecphantides smelled bad, as he is related to the smoke of fig-wood, “the most acrid of all.” Would this joke have been understood by the average person watching the play, or was it intended to be a sly dig, only understood by Aristophanes (and other playwrights possibly watching)? Or neither? Assuming Ecphantides was disliked in general, fun score is 2. The sentence “now, up with another cross-bar” is causing me issues. Sentiment is negative i think, but I do not know what a cross-bar is and cannot find anything online. Looking at the original text, I don’t know where that translation comes from, either. 
Fun because he says to be careful not to let him gnaw through the peg (part of the door?), which would be ridiculous.
Sentiment is mixed because author conveys frustration from the speaker, but also the absurdity of his request.
Positive because he reveals his trick so the old man does not actually get released. Fun score because of the prop and because of the characterization of Bdelycleon. References when Odysseus ties a donkey to his plow? Otherwise I can’t find another link between Odysseus and a donkey. I don’t see where some of these words come from in the translation.
**
Claiming he is rich. Positive sentiment as it is a brag, but to the point so it is a 0, although slight fun can be noted at the reference of heliast. He is equal to the heliast. These two bolded words are presented positively in this sentence.
Neutral. Business-like and straightforward, seems to be a character trait of Bdelycleon. 0 fun fluff.
Scione was lost by the Athenians to the Spartans in the Pel. war, 223 BC (Wasps was written one year after the incident so very contemporary news/reference). Sparrows seem to be associated with good luck, although it is said as a bad thing? Κακοδαίμων “turned into an evil genius” might be related to the sparrow translation.
Slight negative sentiment to make audience empathize with the slaves, but not enough to make the whole sentence classified as negative. Mostly neutral because it is a simple question. The positive is presented first, then the negative sentiment where we are reminded of their drowsiness. Cancels out ig. High fun score because it refers back to the issue beforehand (sleepy slaves) and makes them seem pathetic (?) bc they have to ask for permission.
Mixed bc it portrays their exhaustion but also their triumph in locking Philocleon up. Λάθοι contributes to drawing attention to Philocleon’s intentions being thwarted, so it makes a positive sentiment. However, στίλην seems to do the opposite.
Phrynichus was a poet/playwright. Most of his work has been lost, so this may refer to something that happened in a play of his. Is this his own word that is derived from his name or what? Like machiavellian being an adjective. Μελισιδωνοφρυνιχήρατα. 1 in fun because it serves purpose besides a joke, but information is delivered with fluff still.
Low fun score. There is not much of a joke here; the speaker is focusing on expressing fear. These people are portrayed very negatively by calling them wasps and accompanying that word with various other negative traits wasps have. 
Joke focused on current event of oil scarcity after being destroyed by Spartan invasions. Ὦνόητε kind of calls the boy stupid. Δακτύλῳ points out the boy’s action and what is wrong about it.
I think mixed bc the boy means it negatively, but it would benefit him, which is why he threatens it. Compares them to an animal, always funny. πηλὸν (mud) mentioned to degrade them.
Shows how poor the man is, as he mentions buying knucklebones as a favor for the son (who asked for something nice), which would have been super cheap. Contains an affirmative and a positive adjective.
Πόρον does not match the context, so he is using a word differently than usual for comedic effect. Again, bringing up how poor they are to be funny (the fact that they are relying on an event that is not guaranteed to happen to pay for their dinner). Hypothetically the thing he will offer for dinner is “helles sacred waves,” or unattainable resources. It feels like how my mom used to say I was supposed to “eat sleep for dinner.” so just a creative way to say that he will go hungry.
Κακόν, even though it means “bad,” does not really contribute to the sentiment. It contributes more to the fun score because it is used sort of in a double-negative way, where he is unable to inflict bad things upon other people, which is portrayed as bad in itself by the way he speaks. Fun is higher because he speaks negatively of good things, like enjoying himself. Sentiment is negative because this is clearly what was meant for the audience to pick up when he speaks. “δικάζειν” is coupled with do bad things to people, so it must be negative.
Μιαρὸς means “stained.” Δημολογοκλέων is the first part of Bdelycleon's name replaced with "demologos" which means politician (negatively), so the speaker is accusing him of locking Philocleon up because he has secret political reasons. Part of the fun score too because it is a unique name to call someone that would only suit this particular situation. ξυνωμότης means “conspirator,” which means it is fun for the same reason demologocleon is – it accuses Bdelycleon of working with others to keep his father from ruining something political for him.
Line is purely for plot advancement as it outlines the next move with no fluff. Neutral sentiment probably to insinuate he is thinking.
No particular sentiment attached to the words themselves. Philocleon speaks highly about what he wants to do, but expresses that he does not have much hope. Χοιρίνης added to fun because it is an item specifically tied to the action that Aristophanes is trying to ridicule. Also because he is yearning for this “shell” and makes voting sound like it is a super desirable task when really the average citizen probably didn’t see it like that.
Ὀδυσσεύς - references raise fun scores bc they are not necessary, but add to the understanding of what is going on. Δῆθʼ - surely. A positive.
Ouk = not, so a negative. Κοὐκ is another form of ouk. The sentence itself shows a negative outlook on what they are trying to do. A pun is present with the word ὀπίαν, meaning “cheese” (a certain type that is made with fig-juice). Ὀπίαν is like ope which means hole, and the sentence uses ὀπίαν as if it means hole itself.
The taking of Naxos happened in 470, so this would be around fifty years difference. Meaning he is quite old, so this could just be poking fun at that (Aristophanes himself died at around 60 yrs old). aristophanes has poked fun at someone's old age multiple times, and I think he is doing that here by contrasting the young activities to the old man we see currently. Also establishes these people as old friends. The fun boils down to the reminiscent aspects. Mixed because positive view of how he used to be, but it is contrasted to how he currently is. Ταχέως “swiftly” (readily) to contrast how unsure he is in this moment.
Continuing the age joke. Mixed bc he is negative about his current self by describing his past self positively. Key word, “was.” The verbs seem to do a lot of work here, but I was told that verbs do not carry sentiment as much so I revisit this.
The men are not at arms, because they do not have weapons. They are also, as said before, on the verge of sleep and very reluctant to be guarding. So this is Bdelycleon exaggerating his dire circumstances. Compares himself to a naughty ferret as well (translated as cat, but technically means pole-cat. Greeks kept them around to take care of mice).
Use of dual form of God, referencing Persephone and Demeter allegedly. Come back to this one, I’m stumped. Don’t know why.
Διοπείθους - a politician generally regarded as not sane, so using his name as a role model is another jab at how strange these men are. His name means “trust in Zeus” which could also be part of why it is used here. Used a participle as sentiment lexicon because replacing it with a different word would cause a different sentiment, so I see it as relevant.
Fun part is the old men stroking their ego about their strength, when they probably would not have much. They refer to themselves as trees to paint their strength positively.
Common for people to instruct what to do with their body if they are close to death. 1, he has been reassured that he is not close to death so this is him being dramatic. He even checks to see if they are listening to his last wishes. 2, to wish to be buried in a court is absurd and plays on how obsessed these people are with the law. Positive because he notes how he trusts his friends and it is implied that the risk to his life will be worth it to him. Negative because he is worried he will die. So, mixed.
Negative sentiment, but 0 fun I think because the words themselves do not particularly exhibit much fun. It would be the actions that contribute to the fun, which is not present in a written version.
Smicythion, Tisiades, Chremon and Pheredipnus are most likely politicians names that were distorted. Tisiades cannot be traced, but Smicythion could reference the secretary to the board of control. Chremon (needy) = Chromon, Pheredipnus (winner of dinner) = Pherenicus.
Irony. The chorus worships the court system and prosecutors, so they appeal to these people rather than gods for help.  This would mean they don’t like the gods and the word θεοισεχθρία (hatefulness to the gods) is presented positively, which is meant to shock the audience because Aristophanes obviously knows it would not be seen positively. They do not say “my gods,” but rather refer to people who detest the gods (Theoi means “my gods,” which is how the word starts).
Fun is contained in the physical side of comedy. Men dressed as wasps getting ready to kill. But also the aspect of these men ready to kill to let this jailed man vote adds to the comedy. Ὀργίζω aids the negative sentiment as a verb, as you will rarely see this verb used in a positive way because it means “to irritate.”
Πρωκτός - anus. Calling this area specifically to stab someone adds to fun score because it is crude. Although these men refer to themselves as σφῆκες either neutrally or positively, Aristophanes intended for it to be an insult because no one in the audience would see a wasp positively. Mixed sentiment because it is clear that the speaker is supposed to sound encouraging, but it is only with the purpose of being mocked by Aristophanes.
Lots of slaves came from Phrygia. So these are nicknames for slaves: Μίδα (Midas was a king of Phrygia) and Φρὺξ (Phyrgia made into a name). Μασιντύα is also a nickname for slaves but is not related to Phrygia (greedy feeder). I have often heard the crackling of fig-leaves in the fire – they are all talk, so do not fear them.
Kekrops - politician (well-known king of Athens). Irony present where he is wondering why his son would treat him this way and reflects upon the negative part of parenting as if it were something his son should be happy about.
This is directed to a slave. Irony again. He speaks positively, but nothing he says is good.
Ὀξύθυμος is quick to anger, obviously a negative adjective. κάρδαμον is a strong-smelling seed like mustard. To compare themselves to this is to call themselves unpleasant to deal with, thus it is negative. The translation does not really include these things, but the Greek sentence gets the fun score.
Philocles had a pointy head. He is saying that they would have fought better if they were like Philocles. But not really pointing the sentiment one way or another, so neutral.
Drama again. A big part of the humor of the chorus seems to be them dramatizing the scenarios and their importance in the court. Bdelycleon is attempting to bring an end to democracy with his selfish ways. He is called κομηταμυνία, which means a long-haired Amynias, suggesting that he is Spartan (this took place in Athens during the Peloponnesian War so that is an insult), anti-democratic, and arrogant.
Using ἄκουρος (unshaven) as a link to his supposed Spartan allies is meant to be comical because plenty of older Athenians would have been unshaven as well, so the comedy is the chorus grasping at straws. Insinuate he is tied to Brasidas, a Spartan general. μισόδημος, meaning hating the commons, to insult how he apparently has no care for democracy and their rights as Athenians.
Usually it would be a parent separating from a child, but here we see expectations subverted for a comedic effect. This action would be seen as improper because he nis an only child and thus would leave his father with no one to care for him. The concept itself is what makes the fun score and negative sentiment, so no particular words that I can see.
An old saying that we have since lost the meaning and origin of. We can infer that it is saying something along the lines of “if you think you have problems now, just wait!” or perhaps “you have almost reached the point!” I like the second one better because Bdelycleon had just said he should leave his father alone, which the chorus would obviously agree with. However, the first meaning is backed up by the rest of the sentence. Either way, the audience would understand what was meant, so the fun score is 1. As for sentiment, it is negative because the chorus is ridiculing Bdelycleon and still accusing him of conspiracy.
Straight to the point, -1 fun. Negative sentiment due to the frustration portrayed. Verb δέρω (skin, flay) contributes to sentiment with violent language.
Pun. Hippias, which means horsy, was a tyrant. So this is a joke about how he wanted the prostitute to get on top (ride him like a horse), and her calling this tyrannical. The fact that it is a prostitute adds to the joke because in theory, she would not get much respect from patrons in the first place, so it just adds to the ridiculous behavior they are talking about. Similar to modern-day discourse on “woke culture.” To be quick to anger is clearly a negative trait, or else it would not be shared in this scenario.
Negative because he is wishing for his father to listen to him. Ὀρθροφοιτοσυκοφαντοδικοταλαίπωροι is a compound (early-prowling base-informing sad-litigious plaguy) that is full of negative sentiment. However, because it may not be a typical word, it contributes more to fun score. Morychus was a lover of food, so to wish for his father to be like him is to wish for him to accept a more simple and pleasurable life.
He is speaking highly of his desired life, while describing things that are typically regarded as the finer things in life to be negative. 
Nothing of note
It’s possible that this is a quote from Kleon, which contributes to fun score. Also references how other cities were made to give money to Athens as a tribute. A tribute which Philocleon gets none of, as Bdelycleon points out, despite all he does for the city. No particular negative words, it is the concept which is negative.
Again, straightforward language, but he is insinuating that he is a dishonorable man for doing this. Why would he want his lunch box right now?
Straightforward language. Sentiment is negative because of the way the speaker describes the event.
Θαλλοφόρος - bearers of an olive branch in the Panathenaea had to be very old but they were chosen for their handsomeness. Could be a joke about how they find themselves handsome enough to be chosen, but definitely a negative way to call themselves old. Σκώπτω means “mock” which I believe to be negative as mocking is not done positively, but rather to degrade.
Here Bdelycleon is poking fun at how his father claims that he can “disdain wealth,” which would have been seen as funny because with wealth would come a lot of privileges. Καταχήνη (mockery) is translated as “disdain” so it contributes to sentiment.
Σεμνόω means to exalt, which would be a positive sentiment. In this line, the speaker speaks highly of himself by describing how others react to him. So although fear would be negative, it is used positively here.
Large exaggeration contributes to fun score, as well as the implication that the happiest afterlife attainable (to them) is to still be judging, but in the Isles of the Blest, the Greek paradise. He is showering compliments about the speech, so positive sentiment. Μάκαρ - Blessed.
Straightforward language with little fluff. Borderline a -1 fun because it is kind of serious.
Metaphor to describe how Bdelycleon’s arguments must be in order to beat Philocleon’s. It must act like a millstone to soften the chorus’ sharp prejudice.
This translation does not include Bdelycleon calling his father the "son of Kronus (Κρονίδης)," which is important because it is an attempt to appeal emotionally to a man who believes himself to be on the level of Zeus. It could also be a way to get Zeus’ attention to help. χαλεπός - difficult. Δεινός - fearful, terrible. Νόσος - sickness. All negative language here. Κρονίδης could be seen as negative as he was not a particularly positive role model, but I do not believe it contributes in this way.
Fun score comes from the fact that he interrupted the line to speak. Also how he told his son not to call him “father.” He threatens to kill him in the same breath and says he would not mind the punishment. No particular negative words.
Eucharides was probably a well-known grocer. Philocleon is poor in contrast with this rich man and he is not given food as compensation. However, he does not recognize this as having proved Bdelycleon’s point, so he urges him to continue. He is relatively neutral in doing so.
Although Philocleon is feeling negative, this could have a positive sentiment because he starts to come around and realize how he is mistreated. This is also funny because of the contrast of how adamant he had been up until this point.
Dramatics. He either had a sword held up, or he is referencing how he is losing his “sting” as a wasp. And he is having an existential crisis about the thing he has devoted himself to.
Bdelycleon revealing the different things Philocleon has fallen for and not realized were tricks adds to fun score itself without particular words.
No comments
A concession here, and gets straight to the point. No particular sentiment because of the neutral words used.
The chorus seems to be admitting that they have a weaker argument here, but they say that it is because of a god, which is why Philocleon should give in and reap the rewards the god has in store. Does not admit that they are actually wrong, but that it would be smarter to listen.
Mixed because he is describing treating his father well, but then he notices that he seems to still be thinking, which is bad. Fun because Philocleon is implied to be unable to achieve an erection, so the “wench” he would be given would only massage him. Πέος - penile membrane. Ὀσφύς - loin.
Positive sentiment as the chorus describes Philocleon supposedly coming around to the “right” side. They are complimenting him. Ἄρτιος - Perfect of its kind; suitable. Σωφρονέω - to be of sound mind.
The logic behind Bdelycleon’s argument does not trump Philocleon’s love for convicting people, so much so that he likes to be the last person to vote so that it takes as long as possible. He describes the act positively to match his yearning. Verb here is “ἐράω” – to love. I would say that is positive sentiment because you do not proclaim love for something in a negative way.
Suggestion has not yet been explained, so no fluff nor sentiment.
Arist. is trying to make Bdelycleon’s proposal seem enticing by describing the court system negatively. Πεινάω - to hunger. It is used as a downside to going to court.
He says that eating is a good time to ruminate. Pun is in the word ἀναμασάομαι because of the double-meaning (chew, ruminate).
Αἰσχρός - causing shame. Σκωπτόλης - jester
Perhaps was meant to be a joke because that seems like an odd thing for an oracle to predict. It could be him exaggerating the importance of this arrangement.
He apparently has a weak bladder. A normal courtroom would have required Philocleon, as an old man, to leave multiple times to use the restroom. Adding that it is very near to him places emphasis on this, although the word ἐγγύς (near) does not itself carry a sentiment. It could contribute to fun score, though.
No comments
Fun score stems from how he starts to try a slave for something that is not illegal.
He is speaking of jury service like a religious ceremony. Also he had said earlier that he wished to be buried under the railings, so this is something trivial he cares about. Neutral because it appears he is just making observations.
Λάβης is the dog’s name, which combines the word “λαβή” (Grabber) and the name of a politician, Λάχης, who allegedly embezzled funds in Sicily, hence the Sicilian cheese being stolen by his dog form. The negative sentiment comes from the fact that this is a complaint and inconvenience.
No comments
Expressing gratitude for a positive end to the disagreement they had causes a positive sentiment. Σπονδαῖς has a meaning not listed by PDL which is “peace agreement” which fits here (according to Sommerstein) and has positive sentiment. Ἀγαθός has been listed as positive sentiment in previous sentences as it means “good.”
The chorus is hoping that this method works so that they may be able to quit the courts themselves and instead stay home. Fun because it is ironic how they wish for the thing they supposedly love so much to end.
Just a few lines ago, this chorus was saying that Bdelycleon was against the people and democracy, but they have completely changed their tune now. The irony contributes to fun score. They now speak highly of him with a positive sentiment.
A simple statement of the crime and proposed punishment of this dog. The fact that they are talking about a pet dog contributes to fun score.
The words here create a negative sentiment, as Sosias takes up the role of describing the crime in place of the other dog, who would not speak. Δεινός (fearful, terrible) has a negative sentiment. This whole scene is a reference to Laches crimes in Sicily.
Again, this line is from the other dog’s perspective, which is why Sosias is complaining that he Labes did not split the cheese with him. The other dog probably also resembled a politician (Kleon), which is why he complains only of what he does not get, rather than the crime itself. As it is a complaint, it is negative sentiment.
The two situations are combined in this sentence with an ambigious metaphor. The verb περιπλέω (sail) has little relevance to the literal situation, but it is intended to reference Laches’ actions again, as he sailed around Sicily. The dog is called a man to further this. He is accused of “chewing up the rind of the city,” which does not make sense on its own. It refers to how Laches ate up the funds of the city, while Labes ate up the cheese and rind in the platter. The use of αὖ (again) appears to be a pun, because it also means “bow-wow” according to PDL. None of these words are outrightly negative on their own, but the whole line is a layered joke, hence the fun score.
Because the prosecutor dog represents Kleon, he is shown as loud and reveals that he only cares to get rid of this rival. Also, while the word “κλέπτα” (thief) could be used with a negative sentiment, the dog does not say it in this way, but rather self-identifies with it. Κολάζω (punish) is a verb with a negative sentiment. He then goes on to say that since he is speaking up, the “jury” must listen to his point of view or he will never speak up again, or “bark” (presumably, this is not a bad threat because the audience would have wanted Kleon himself to stop talking anyway).
Roosters do not have opinions on the law, so he is really just putting his all into pretending that this mock-trial is real. He calls out to a (pretend) lawgiver to hand him the chamber-pot, which the audience would find funny as it is strange to ask someone so high up to do such a menial task. Negative sentiment due to how Philocleon is using his words to speak negatively of the dog (πανουργία - knavery).
